---
layout: post
title: Every Operating System Sucks
date: 2017-08-02
description: Actually, I like all but one of them. But let's do some griping.
---

When you learn enough about computers, you start to be amazed that they work at all. The applications that we use every single day (and largely take for granted) rely on layer upon layer of code from who-knows-when, rife with little hacks, known bugs, and undiscovered security issues. This software was probably written in an unfriendly, error-prone programming language that no recent college graduate wants to learn or use. So we treat existing software like black boxes and create new libraries on top of them, and each time we do, the world of software development gets simultaneously a little simpler and a little more complex.

And yet, software *works*. In that sense, I could have called this blog post, "Every Operating System Is Amazing." We have three stable kernels (Windows NT, XNU, and Linux) that power all the most popular operating systems (Windows, macOS, iOS, Android, and countless Linux distributions). Computers in 2017 are no longer the unreliable, don't-breathe-too-hard fear generators of my youth. Solid-state drives, wireless connectivity, and cloud storage make significant data loss unlikely. Designers have made applications more beautiful and usable. App stores and sandboxing mean that programs install reliably and uninstall cleanly. Every major operating system is *dramatically* better than the products I happily used throughout the 80s and 90s. And yet, in its own way, every operating system sucks.


### Windows

Consider the following scenario: you go to the local Apple Store, spend $2,600 on two identical laptops, install Windows on one of them, close both lids, and come back a week later. What do you find? The Windows laptop has a dead battery, and the laptop running macOS has 94% of its charge.

Some devices are better than others, but the fact remains that power management in Windows is terrible. Previously, Microsoft could blame manufacturers like Dell and HP. But now that Microsoft designs their own hardware in the Surface line of computers, they really have no excuse.

The Edge browser has made enormous strides in the past six months, but its add-on support remains poor and its stability questionable. Tablet use in Windows 10 is clunky when compared to iOS and Android, and the Windows Store is so packed with imposters and shady applications that I don't know a single person who willingly uses it.


### macOS

For years, computers from Apple had the one-two punch of underpowered GPUs and old versions of OpenGL, an open source graphics API. Combined with its comparatively small market share, Apple computers were never a good place to play games. Improvements to the ecosystem have been slow and incremental. Steam for macOS arrived in 2010, seven years after the Windows client. Intel only began taking integrated graphics seriously several years ago. One imagines that the modern Metal graphics API would never have come to macOS if not for the popularity of iOS gaming, but macOS does indeed have it now. Steam has roughly 16,500 games available for purchase. Almost all of them run on Windows. 5,500 of them work on macOS.

macOS lacks touchscreen support, still features the borderline comical Dashboard application, has as its default the worst major web browser on the market, and often hard crashes after being unplugged from external displays.


### Linux

To be clear, I like Linux. I use it on my home computer. But the app selection is poor: no Office, no Creative Cloud, few syncing solutions, and one-quarter the number of games. Battery life is even worse than Windows, and coaxing an NVIDIA or AMD GPU into performing anywhere near its actual capabilities is a Herculean task.


### iOS

Because of its sheer dependability, iOS is probably the most "modern" operating system available today. It starts instantly, battery life is exceptional, app crashes don't tank the entire system, and the UI remains fluid and responsive at all times. App selection is fantastic, and of course it works well on tablets.

The problem with iOS is that it's not a "real" operating system, because real operating systems are self-sustaining. When I say "self-sustaining," I mean the following: I can use a Windows PC to develop Windows applications (or even work on the kernel). Ditto with macOS and any distribution of Linux. The first iPad arrived more than seven years ago, the iPad Pro two years ago. iOS has existed in consumer devices for ten years. It's time for Apple to bring Xcode to the iPad and add touchpad support.


### Android

I've never had a positive experience with an Android device. When I mentioned my opinion to someone recently, he said, "Oh, Android is so much better now."

"Really?" I replied, genuinely curious. "Do you get regular software updates?"

"Well, no," he said. "That's still an issue."

"How long does it take for you to get the new Android version on your phone after Google releases it?"

He winced a bit. "That's really more the fault of the carrier and the…"

Honestly, at this point, I don't care whose fault it is. Android has existed in consumer devices for eight years and remains a security disaster. Devices rarely receive Google's feature-packed software updates and inevitably come loaded with bloatware that no consumer actually wants. Google Play has an extensive library of quality apps, but it also contains an even greater number of imposters and shady applications than the Windows Store.

That said, Android has done something incredible: it has brought smartphones --- and with them, internet access --- to *two billion people*, largely through low-cost (or at least affordable) devices. As of this year, Android has more users than Windows. I'm not sure how many of those people have never owned a computer, but access to the internet *transforms lives*. Whatever ills we ascribe to it, internet access is a nearly unqualified good.

Kudos to Google, even if I never want to own another Android device. &#9786;
