---
layout: post
title: Technical Writing and Reddit
date: 2017-11-10
description: Or "Getting Hired."
---

I ride the train to work every day, so I have plenty of time to read. Every now and then, I scan [r/technicalwriting](https://www.reddit.com/r/technicalwriting/) on Reddit. Most questions come from aspiring or novice technical writers who are looking to "break into" the industry. The advice they receive is usually well-intentioned, extensive, and wrong. What follows is my advice for landing a job as a technical writer.

* Subject-matter competence

    Companies might not need another *expert*, but they do need someone *competent* in a given field. A medical device company probably wants to hire someone who knows the various reasons why a patient might get a CT scan or --- I don't know --- how a pacemaker stimulates the heart. A heavy equipment manufacturer might want someone with a background in mechanical engineering or construction management.

    Likewise, in the software industry, I've never hired someone who didn't have a foundation in computer science. I don't need full-fledged developers, but candidates who have never written an ugly Python script or heard of a for loop aren't going to progress far into the interview process.

* Decent to excellent writing

    The need for strong writers goes down as a team grows in size. In my experience, turning a decent writer into a good one requires six months of mentorship and isn't especially challenging. The first writer at a company, yes, needs to be someone stellar who can enforce a high quality bar. But if a team already has seven great writers, I'm much more interested in hiring a decent writer with a high degree of subject-matter competence.

    Writing samples are unimportant. Where did those samples come from? How many rounds of revisions did they go through? Did other writers contribute? I always administer an on-site writing test in order to understand how candidates perform under time constraints.

* Tools matter little

    Although tools greatly influence *how* we work, they are ultimately a means to an end. If I have to write in DITA instead of AsciiDoc, sure, I'll gripe, but the total drop in my productivity is probably no more than 20%. Likewise, if I asked you to clean your carpets using a shop vac instead of an upright vacuum, the experience might be uncomfortable, but it wouldn't be the end of the world.

    If you already have the first two bullet points covered and are looking for something else to study, HTML, CSS, shell scripting, regular expressions, and lightweight markup are broadly helpful in technical writing. XML-based markup languages and desktop publishing software are both dying and not worth learning unless your job requires it.

    But honestly, a candidate's knowledge of tools has never factored into one of my hiring decisions.

* Fast learners

    Sad to say, I have very little advice here. Technical writers need to be able to learn new things quickly. Any sensible interview process should try to test a candidate's intelligence. From the candidate perspective, try restating concepts to show that you've learned them and asking questions that demonstrate your understanding. In any career, being smart helps, of course, but being diligent probably helps more.

* Positive influences

    Technical writers need to work within a team to accomplish much of value. You don't retreat to your desk for four days and then emerge with *the finished documentation*. Subject-matter experts need to review content for accuracy. Editors need to review content for style and clarity. Managers need to provide details on a project's direction. Testers need to share the idiosyncrasies of a product. Developers need to clarify expected behavior.

    More importantly, all of these people need to enjoy working with you so that they *want* to do these things. Thankfully, being a positive influence on a team is within your power. Everyone can be pleasant and likable and upbeat. Everyone can be empathetic and kind. These qualities need to come across during an interview.

In order of priority, great technical writers understand a given subject area, learn quickly (or work so hard that they appear to learn quickly), play well with others, write clearly and concisely, and are open to learning and using a variety of tools. I know the word "writer" is half of the job title, but "technical" is the more important of the two.
