---
layout: post
title: The Big Idea
date: 2017-05-11
description: Some thoughts on Horizon Zero Dawn and creative freedom.
---

In 2003, a studio named Guerilla Games started work on a first-person shooter for the PlayStation 2 called *Killzone*. The game's sci-fi plot is as unimaginative as its title: nuclear war has rendered Earth uninhabitable, two factions of humanity flee the solar system, and those factions fight over a new planet.

The interesting factor here is the timing. *Halo: Combat Evolved* had just sold three million copies for the Xbox. After years of first-person shooters being primarily PC games, shooters for consoles were suddenly big business. Sony, the dominant console manufacturer at the time, wanted to dull Microsoft's comparative advantage and secure its own piece of the pie. They tasked one of their studios with developing a PlayStation-exclusive first-person shooter. Rather than giving Guerilla total creative freedom or even just broad guidelines, Sony asked for a direct competitor. They wanted a "Halo killer."

*Killzone* released in late 2004, exactly one week before *Halo 2*. Over its lifetime, *Killzone* sold 950,000 copies. *Halo 2* sold nearly 8.5 million. To its credit, Sony did not abandon the franchise or close the studio. *Killzone* was still a financial success, and the game itself wasn't terrible; it just wasn't Halo.

And so began what I can only imagine was one of the more tedious decades in the history of game development. Following *Killzone*, Guerilla released *Killzone: Liberation* (2006), *Killzone 2* (2009), *Killzone 3* (2011), and *Killzone: Shadow Fall* (2013).

This February, Guerilla released its newest title, *Horizon Zero Dawn*. I have no doubt that whoever pitched this game to Sony and received the green light to proceed with development is now an office legend. *Horizon* is an open-world, third-person shooter with arrows instead of bullets, robot dinosaurs instead of aliens, and a unique protagonist with motivations that go beyond someone like Kurt Russell growling, "I'm going to kill them all, sir." The entire setting is off-the-wall and bizarre, but when experienced in-game, it still feels coherent and intriguing.

*Horizon* has inventory management, crafting, skill trees, and levels. It has experience points and quests and a world map and, at the risk of repeating myself, *robot dinosaurs*. Free of creative constraints, Guerilla put its own personal spin on all the best ideas from all the best games, rather than all the same ideas from all the Halo games. *Horizon* sold 2.6 million copies in its first two weeks on the market and is on track to be Guerilla's best-selling game ever.

Giving individuals in any industry this same degree of freedom is risky, but essential if you want them to make transformative improvements to a product or experience. Big ideas upset existing workflows, cause feature regressions, ignore conventional wisdom, and perhaps most critically, *sound weird*. Experienced people find them off-putting, as if new ideas are somehow insults directed against the past. Given the opportunity, most focus groups or decision-making bodies will quash major changes before they appear in a shipping product.

Committees serve a purpose, of course: they help ensure slow, incremental progress towards an objective. Individuals might make massive strides towards an objective, but just as often, their intuition is wrong and their work is for naught.

A former boss of mine refers to this distinction as one of "steps" and "jumps." Steps are the everyday progress you make towards a goal. Jumps are the revolutionary changes that redefine the goal or move you somewhere you hadn't planned to find yourself. Clearly we need both in product development, but I'd argue agile methodologies have skewed the software industry too far towards steps. Some companies now mandate weekly software releases, which barely provides developers the time to *plan* something exciting, much less implement it. This pursuit of a rapid feedback loop discourages introspection, personal intuition, wild brainstorming sessions, and experimentation. Instead, there's an increased emphasis on bite-sized, easy-to-consume information --- product metrics, in other words. But product metrics rarely tell you anything about features that don't yet exist.

Of course, the most tenacious enforcers of this "step" mentality are governments, and I can understand why: rigid processes assume that the person who came before you did things for a good reason. Governments *have* to function this way. "It took the will of the people to make this change, and it will take the will of the people to undo it," a politician might pontificate. Processes *preserve* prior work and build on top of it, whereas freedom preserves nothing and relies on you to make good decisions *today*.

The goal, then, is to encourage freedom while implementing strategies to mitigate risk. Let people experiment. Be aware of the sunk cost fallacy, and accept that the cost of freedom means wasting a significant amount of employee time and having to pull the plug on numerous failed projects. Implement checks designed to catch these sorts of failures before they spiral out of control.

I know, I know --- easier said than done. But people do their best (and worst) work when you trust them to find novel ways of solving problems. Over time, those peaks and valleys gain more ground than a steady march up the mountain.
