---
layout: post
title: Defining Invention
date: 2017-11-27
description: Keep calm and scale on with The Founder.
---

Recently, I discussed *The Founder*, the 2016 film that portrays the creation of McDonald's, with a friend. My friend suggested that Ray Kroc didn't invent anything. Rather, he *replicated* what the McDonald brothers invented *n* times. At face value, this claim seems reasonable. My friend called these acts "procedural" rather than "novel." I've heard versions of this idea echoed on a variety of subjects. To be blunt, I consider them oversimplifications.

For a straightforward example, consider beverages at a startup. The 10 developers drink an average of two cups of coffee a day, and maybe half of them add a splash of milk. In this environment, a gallon of milk lasts about a week.

You, the founder of the company, buy a gallon of milk every weekend and bring it to work on Monday morning. You purchase coffee in bulk during a monthly trip to Costco. Total cost to the company is $8/week.

As the company grows to 20 people, you can just buy double the coffee and milk for a total cost of $16/week, but at 30 people, that's *too much milk*. You don't want to carry that much milk home from the supermarket, store it, and bring it in to the office. No one does. We've hit a point where something in the process has to change in order to maintain the status quo.

The obvious solution is to use a food delivery service, which charges $100/year, applies a 10% premium to the cost of all goods, and has a $35 minimum on all purchases. Because milk is perishable, you don't want to buy it in bulk. So you stop going to Costco and add $23 of coffee and snacks into your order to reach exactly $35 per week, which is really $37 when you factor in the annual fee. We've increased the cost by 130% for a mere 50% increase in the amount of coffee and milk.

Of course, now we have *snacks*. &#9786;

These sorts of decisions happen *constantly* when you scale. The decision to grab a second gallon of milk every week is completely different from the decision to identify and employ a delivery service, and the increase in complexity and cost is not linear. You have to face and overcome new, novel challenges every step of the way during the march towards *n*.

As the startup further scales to four offices in three different countries, you can imagine needing at least one dependable, bilingual, full-time employee to manage the various beverage vendors. At 16 offices in 12 countries, you probably need an entire team. At this scale, the team will surely have other duties, but some portion of its time will be devoted to the consistent delivery of coffee and milk to your offices, a task so much more complicated and expensive than your weekly trip to the grocery store that the two are almost beyond comparison. The idea that no one had to solve any new challenges during this transition from one office to 16 is borderline insulting.

Anyone who cooks already understands that efficiency and scale are not mundane, procedural considerations. Cooking dinner for yourself and working the line in a restaurant are similar tasks only insomuch as they both involve food. Otherwise, every single task from ordering to preparation to cleanup is wildly different.

Creating a great dish is a hard problem. Figuring out how to consistently replicate it for 200 guests every evening is also a hard problem. The problems exercise different parts of the brain, but one isn't strictly easier than the other. Solving for one particular *n* --- in this case, 200 --- might be easier than creating the great dish in the first place, but surely there an exists some *n* on the horizon that equalizes the difficulty. Maybe it requires preparing the dish for 1,000 or 10,000 or 100,000 people, but eventually solving for scale is just as hard as figuring something out in the first place.

Despite not being a physical good, software tends to follow a similar pattern. A team might create a revolutionary, web-based spreadsheet app over the course of a week and then realize that it can only handle 2,000 rows of data. The app has some slick ideas, logs thousands of daily users, and upends the concept of what a spreadsheet app should be --- and now it needs a complete rewrite from the ground up. Is this rewrite to support hundreds of thousands of lines per spreadsheet (and millions of simultaneous users) a simpler challenge than creating the app in the first place?

I think the reason for my friend's assertion lies in our perception of art. Works of art, almost by definition, are singular. Reproductions and prints might exist, but the *original thing* is the art. Because everyone has tried creative endeavors and knows how challenging they are, there seems to exist a collective assumption that scaling is simpler, even when we consider *products* rather than art.

When we think this way, we ignore that sometimes a great idea strikes like a bolt of lightning. We ignore that sometimes you can design a working prototype within a few days. As so many frivolous software patents demonstrate, sometimes the idea and proof of concept are the easy parts, and the real-world implementation is the hard part. Maybe the McDonald brothers did the heavy lifting in their business with Kroc. By all accounts, Kroc was a real asshole. But I just don't accept that opening 37,000 McDonald's restaurants required overcoming fewer novel challenges than designing an efficient hamburger joint. When it comes to products and services, we need to consider scale on a case-by-case basis rather than painting it with the same broad brush that we use for art.
