---
layout: post
title: The Magic of the Nintendo Switch
date: 2017-09-11
description: When do dedicated devices make sense?
---

The Nintendo Switch is *not* the most impressive piece of hardware I've ever held. The wireless Joy-Con controllers are adequate, but a little small for my hands. To accommodate these controllers, the Switch itself is thicker than you would expect. At 0.55 inches, it feels more like a slab than a slate.

The Switch uses an ARM-based system on a chip, the same low-power architecture that practically every smart phone uses, yet it has a small vent and fan, additions that would be inconceivable on a phone. I've only used the Switch's kickstand twice, because I thought it was going to snap clean off both times. And yet, the Switch is the most modern and exciting computing device available today.

The Switch achieves this feat through its defining feature: the ability to switch between a television and its built-in display seamlessly. No other device on the market *really* does that. The mobile leaders, Apple and Google, haven't even tried. Some phones from Samsung (with DeX) and Microsoft (with Continuum) purport to do it, but they come with massive caveats and configuration headaches that compromise the experience: the docks are sold separately, only certain input devices are supported, most apps do not work properly, and performance is inconsistent.

The Switch addresses all of these issues. The dock is included with every purchase. You use the same controllers no matter where you are, and they too are included in the box. With rare exception, every app works perfectly on both the big screen and the small screen. Nintendo ramps up performance slightly when the Switch is docked, but the two modes feel comparable. Most importantly, the *act* of switching modes is fast. There's no software menu to navigate or tiny icon to right-click. Mid-game, you can just yank the Switch out of the dock. The game is playable again within one second, just long enough for the Switch to realize what's happened and change displays. I own a modern television that supports HDMI-CEC, so if the Switch is powered on when I put it back in its dock a few hours later, it *automatically turns on the TV* --- can't get easier than that.

So when I say that the Switch is the most modern computing device available today, I say it because Nintendo accomplished in an elegant, compromise-free fashion what no other company has managed to achieve since Apple built the iPhone: kill the need for a category of device. I don't need a Sony PlayStation Vita or Nintendo 3DS, because the Switch is a great portable system. But I also don't need a Wii U, because the Switch is a great console. Either way you look at it, the Switch has removed a device from my life.

Simplifications like this one mean fewer batteries to charge, fewer redundant pieces of silicon to purchase, fewer user interfaces to learn, fewer ecosystems to invest in, and fewer electronics to recycle six years from now. The feeling is glorious. I want the same experience from all my portable devices. Specifically, I want my phone to double as a desktop computer *in the same compromise-free fashion as the Nintendo Switch*. Until that day, Nintendo's vision of what mobile computing can be will remain more impressive than anything Apple, Microsoft, Google, and Samsung have released in the past five years.

The irony here is that with an in-house game controller for the iPhone, a dock, and an emphasis on "real" games, Apple could conceivably out-Switch the Switch. They could turn the iPhone into not just a desktop computer, but a game console. There's no technical reason *Zelda: Breath of the Wild* couldn't run on an iPhone. Apple could do to the Switch what they did to MP3 players, point-and-shoot cameras, and GPS navigation systems.

Whether they *want to* or *should* is another story. In fact, they probably shouldn't. Phones sit squarely in the center of people's lives. Imagine having your phone docked across the room for hours at a time, popping up notifications on your television for every email, text message, and new Instagram post from Steven, that acquaintance of yours from high school who feels compelled to notify the entire world before taking even a single bite of his meal. People aren't comfortable having their phones out of arm's reach, much less on semi-public display. In the same way that reading on a Kindle is better than reading on an iPad, playing games on dedicated hardware enables a superior experience and keeps distractions to a minimum.

The need to keep iPhones in pockets means that Apple's only real strategy to control the television is the Apple TV, a $149 device that doesn't support 4K streaming, doesn't include a game controller, has very few quality games to begin with, and certainly doesn't double as a portable gaming system. Due to the struggles of the Windows phone, Microsoft has practically given up on mobile devices. Like Sony, they recently shifted their console architectures to x86. If you keep an eye on the state of Android hardware, you know that x86 is currently not well-suited to low-power devices.

Sony is perhaps the most likely competitor to Nintendo, with their combination of the PlayStation Vita and the PlayStation TV. But the PlayStation Vita is on life support, and the PlayStation TV is discontinued. Neither met Sony's sales expectations. Sony would have to release a new version of the Vita, which in late 2015, Shuhei Yoshida said they had no plans to do.

For now, the Switch occupies a unique, irresistible niche, and customers are responding. From March 3 to June 30, Nintendo sold 4.7 million Switches. Nintendo has maintained its momentum with a staggering number of quality games for such a young console: *Zelda*, *Mario Kart 8*, *Splatoon 2*, *Mario + Rabbids*, *Arms*, *Sonic Mania*, and more.

One of the major tech companies might eventually kill the need for Switch-like gaming consoles. On that day, I'll once again cherish the gift of less. But *until* that day, I'll just cherish the Switch.
