---
layout: post
title: What Is Code?
date: 2018-01-30
description: Why "docs as code" is such a strange phrase.
---

I'm sometimes called a proponent of the "docs as code" model. I've always found the term exasperating, but could never clearly define why.

To me, hearing "docs as code" was akin to hearing someone say, "Ah, yes, the 'Snickers as candy bar' movement." It just sounded bizarre. "Docs *are* code," I'd think, pulling at my hair.

Although there's a crisp, simple logic to saying, "Coding means programming. Therefore, code must be written in a programming language," there are a few side effects to this way of thinking. HTML, XML, and JSON are markup languages. CSS is a style sheet language. Some people call all of these formats "data" to distinguish them from code. But did the designer who wrote the HTML and CSS for your new corporate website not code anything? What about the technical writer who recreated a set of simple PNG diagrams as XML-based vector graphics by hand?

Lightweight markup languages like reStructuredText and preprocessors like Sass present even more complicated cases. In the same way that an application converts TypeScript to JavaScript so that a web browser can execute it, applications convert these high-level markup and style sheet languages into something a web browser can understand, a process that makes them sound even more like code. Yet, they're so simple to write that they can't be code, right?

That argument seems to be the crux of the issue: code has to be complicated. LaTeX might be code, but Markdown certainly isn't. An unfortunate elitism seems to hang over the definition. I prefer the following:

> code (noun) --- human-readable plain text formatted for computer consumption

Maybe a human writes the code, or maybe an algorithm generates it, but the keywords, braces, symbols, tags, and structure exist so that a computer can eventually make sense of it.[^1] My definition decouples programming and coding, programming languages and code:

* Writing HTML and CSS is **not** programming, because programming requires a programming language.
* Writing HTML and CSS by hand is coding. Using a WYSIWYG editor or similar tool is not.
* Either way, the resulting HTML and CSS are code.

I realize that the practical value of this definition is minimal, because no one disputes that HTML, CSS, Markdown, reStructuredText, AsciiDoc, Sass, Less, YAML, and TOML files should be kept in version control alongside the other code/with the actual code. Still, I'm glad to have gotten to the root of why I find "docs as code" so strange. To me, lightweight markup passes the [duck test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duck_test) with flying colors. If it looks like a duck, swims like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it is probably code.

---

[^1]: When we say "code" without modifiers, we almost always mean "source code." Java compiles to bytecode, and many languages compile to machine code, neither of which are human-readable.
