---
layout: post
title: Blogs and Docs
date: 2018-01-30
description: A natural synergy. With one catch.
---

Whenever a company included a technical walkthrough in a blog post, I used to sneer a little bit. "Yes," I'd think, "let's put a tutorial into a format that we won't keep up-to-date over time and disconnect it from all other information about the product --- genius."

My view has changed. I've come to believe that blogs and documentation have the corny, 1 + 1 = 3 synergy that people reference far too often in the business world.

Blogs are content via drip feed. People almost certainly won't (and shouldn't be expected to) read documentation from start to finish, but they might subscribe to a blog and read an interesting post once a week. Unlike documentation, these posts don't need to solve urgent problems and provide concise answers to user questions. Blogs are more casual. Readers are probably just browsing and consuming material that they find interesting. The tension of needing to offer immediate, easy-to-follow solutions is gone.

The situation is a lot like the Dickens novels of the 1800s. A literary magazine published *Oliver Twist* as a monthly serial for more than two years. If I were to toss all 156,000 words of the novel on your desk, you might laugh and throw it right back at me. But broken into 5,000-word chapters, each one delivered to your inbox once a week, you might subscribe.

Blogs need documentation so that they can link to complex processes and keep from getting bogged down in excessive detail. They also need documentation so that, when they inevitably go out of date, readers can fill in the gaps with current information.

Likewise, documentation benefits from blogs. Great blog posts generate excitement about a product's potential and increase traffic to the documentation. Blogs can use a more engaging, narrative-driven writing style that might not be appropriate for documentation.[^1]

Here's the problem: we live in a world of constraints. You might not have time to maintain a company's documentation *and* write frequent blog posts. You could hire a product evangelist, of course, but does that staffing make sense? For some companies, yes, *hire that person*. For many companies, I suspect the answer is no. If you find yourself in a situation with severe resource constraints, the reality is that good documentation is more important than a good blog. You might be better off with another technical writer. &#9786;

---

[^1]: Especially if the documentation is localized into seven different languages.
