---
layout: post
title: Measuring Success
date: 2018-04-26
description: How can we make our assessments more quantitative?
---

One of the enduring problems of documentation is the unwillingness of many technical writers to perform basic data collection and analysis. Believe me, I understand why. Data analysis is boring and tedious. Most people don't want to do it. Further, smart people trust their intuition, because they're usually right. So when you ask a technical writer about the quality of the documentation, you tend to receive an answer that is some variation of, "In my professional opinion..."

A large part of being intellectually rigorous is supporting your opinions with data. We don't accept this "professional opinion" line of reasoning from scientists, academics, project managers, developers, doctors, or journalists. We've been taught throughout our lives that art is subjective, and yes, writing is an art form. But it's a fallacy to say that all writing is subjective. You can assess documentation using many objective criteria. Is the content accurate? Does it omit critical information? Did a subject matter expert review it?

Going further than objective criteria, what we really want are *quantitative* ways to assess the quality of writing. We want numbers. Consider two versions of the same marketing email. Even if every marketer on the team agrees that one is superior to the other *before* sending them out, the only way to accurately gauge their effectiveness is to measure how many readers click the link. As long as the emails aren't unprofessional or in poor taste, the opinion of the marketing team is a distant second to the click-through rate.

Nothing in documentation is so clear-cut, though. A page view doesn't mean "a user read the page from start to finish." A page view might mean "a user glanced at the page, determined it was worthless, and closed the browser tab in a huff." Adding Google Analytics to your documentation is a great idea, but page views, time on page, exit rate, and unique users are only a piece of the puzzle. I use the following quantitative metrics to help draw conclusions:

* Documentation metrics
* Documentation feedback and bugs
* Product metrics
* Product feedback and bugs
* Support tickets
* Search queries
* Pull requests
* Product surveys

The first, uh, six bullet points are the important ones. The other two are *fine*, but I don't rely on them.

What really interests me is the intersection of these metrics. Where do they agree? More importantly, where do they disagree? If a page gets tons of page views, no bugs, few support tickets, and a lot of usage within the application, I can assume the page is doing a decent job.

Conversely, if a page gets few views, but product metrics indicate its corresponding feature is enormously popular and 22% of all support tickets involve the feature, I know a problem almost certainly exists within the documentation. Analytics don't tell you definitively what the problem is. Instead, they're more like treasure maps; they tell you were to dig. Maybe you won't find anything noteworthy, but if the data points you in a particular direction, you have to check.

Many of these metrics must be categorized or bucketed in order for you to perform any sort of quantitative analysis on them. Bugs, feedback, and tickets all need to be tagged by topic and severity. Further, one-off reports from relunctant teams are not enough. You need *ongoing* access in order to identity trends over time and stay up-to-date.

If you don't have ongoing access, well, get it. Buy cupcakes for a team. Involve your manager. Make a stink (in the most diplomatic way).

We can't ignore our intuition, of course. The goal here is to cross-reference our professional opinions against these metrics. Here are the subjective criteria I use to assess the quality of documentation:

* Example-driven

    Give developers what they want --- code samples --- up front, not after a lengthy introduction, two procedures, and a reference table. Explain *why* people should do something with a real-world example. Make these aspects of the documentation the focus rather than the afterthought.

* Searchable and scannable

    People don't read documentation, and frankly, they shouldn't. They search for a term and then scan pages for content that looks relevant. Documentation should consist of headers, lists, tables, code samples, images --- anything to avoid having paragraph after paragraph of prose.

* Up-to-date

    Documentation needs to be correct, of course. But writing accurate documentation is the easy part. *Keeping* it up-to-date over a five year period is the hard part. You should have an avenue for reader feedback, insert yourself into the development process, and publish constantly.

* Targeted

    By trying to write to everyone, you're actually writing to no one. Documentation should be targeted to one or more representative groups, each of which is trying to accomplish something. The idea of writing for a literate person with no other knowledge is absurd. Define an audience and write to them.

* Organized and attractive

    If readers don't know enough to search for the proper term, can they navigate to the right topic? Does the documentation reflect the standards of the modern web? Does it look friendly and professional?

    When buying obscure gifts, I often encounter online stores that are probably very well-run, but if their websites look like garbage, I'm not going to trust them enough to give out my credit card number. Documentation might not require a credit card, but it still needs to inspire trust.

* Peer-reviewed

    All writers, no matter how excellent they are at their jobs, benefit from the eyes of an editor and subject matter expert. Think of the process as getting +2 on a code review. Ask professional authors how much they depend on their editors and beta readers.

* Consistent and credible

    One of my greatest pet peeves is when a technical writer tries to impress the world with his or her expansive knowledge of synonyms. Pick the right word and use it consistently. Likewise, define terms before abbreviating them, follow the rules of grammar, and don't try to be overly cute or fun, especially if your content is destined for localization.

* Human

    Talk like a person. Bend the rules of your style guide as necessary in order for your content to read in a natural, engaging way. Don't let the marketing department stop you from calling attention to some explicit non-use cases, areas in which your product is not a good fit. Avoiding humor doesn't mean you have to write like a robot.

Given all these criteria, I might have an opinion on whether a particular page is "good" or not, but I have to support that opinion with data. I think a page is up-to-date, but how many bugs have I received on it in the past three months? I think a page targets the developer audience well, but why do I have so many bugs from highly technical readers? Subject matter experts claim to be reviewing my content before it goes out, but why have my past three feature launches all received documentation bugs within 24 hours?

Really, this blog post isn't about documentation strategies. Being intellectually rigorous and analyzing data is a *life* strategy. This sort of "basic managerial hygiene," as I heard one person call it, is a hallmark of great employees and will make you better at any job you ever have.
