---
layout: post
title: Get a Room
date: 2018-10-26
description: When technology lets us down.
---

I've worked in Silicon Valley for years now, perhaps the one place in the world where you would expect to have modern technology and reliable internet connectivity, and I've lost count of the number of meetings that have turned into unmitigated wastes of time due to flaky videoconferencing systems. Echoes, acoustic feedback, microphone pops, degraded video streams, background noise, connection drops, and of course, intermittent audio---I see and hear[^1] it all on a weekly basis.

Most conference rooms that I use contain a tablet, an Amazon Echo, a giant display, a sound bar, an adjustable camera, and two dedicated microphones. Each room also contains a clear indictment of the system's reliability: a landline telephone.

This lack of reliably is obnoxious, but we still use videoconferencing systems before switching to the telephone because we recognize the importance of nonverbal cues and visual aids in communication. For meetings that center around the dissemination of information---daily stand-ups and the like---the difference isn't huge. For meetings that require consensus, the difference is massive.

Videoconferencing systems undermine the meritocracy. The goal at any company is for the best idea to win, but latency and lack of physical presence make it far too easy to accidentally talk over someone. Well-meaning, smart people in other locations are less likely to pay attention and contribute. Even great ideas are less compelling when they come from a face on a webcam rather than a human in a room.

More and more, companies are embracing the distributed workforce. Theoretically, this shift lets companies hire all the best people from all over the world, as opposed to all the best people who are willing to move to a particular metropolitan area. The downside is less engaged employees, employees who are often, literally and figuratively, disconnected from the decision-making process. These employees can do great work, but might not connect with the mission of the company, build strong relationships with colleagues, or offer up their own long-term corporate visions. The distributed workforce builds contributors, not leaders.

Fortunately or unfortunately, we can't shove that genie back into the bottle. Distributed work has too many benefits to ignore. With no commute, workers are theoretically more productive. Companies can save money on overhead---fewer desks and less office space---and salaries; $80,000 a year goes a lot further in St. Louis than San Francisco.

What we can do is be more mindful of the pros and cons. We can more carefully consider communication skills and empathy in interviews. We can debate asynchronously over email lists. We can use agendas and skilled moderators in meetings to ensure that everyone gets a voice. We can schedule more offsites and social gatherings to help strengthen relationships.

The most straightforward improvement is to fly more people to more meetings. If a decision-making meeting has the potential to be contentious, invite no more than six people who can be *physically present in the same room*. Skip the videoconferencing system altogether. Postpone until key people are available. Take notes, and email them to the rest of the team for feedback. No solution is perfect---mine certainly isn't---but most people will admit that indiscriminate use of videoconferencing systems is far less perfect.

---

[^1]: Well, sort of.
